---
layout: story
title: Fairness in global climate action
type: big reuse
abstract: > 
  We need a strong agreement on climate action in Paris at the end of the month. 
  But is a  country like the United States in a position to place demands on other
  countries regarding their environmental standards?
date: 2015-11-12
---

In the lead up to the UN climate change negotiations in Paris at the end of this month, [Brazilian Senator Ivo Cassol is fuming](http://www.npr.org/sections/parallels/2015/11/10/453512623/the-amazon-as-it-looks-to-a-man-who-made-his-fortune-there). Cassol's take is that if countries like the United States wants to breathe clean air supported by the Brazialian rainforests, then they had best be ready to pay for it.

> "Is it fair to ask Brazil to do all the conservation when the United States made the mess to begin with? That's very hypocritical of the Americans.... The same rules have to apply for everyone or for no one. Are we to be the slave of other countries? The lungs of the United States? The lungs of other countries? Even though they send us only a pittance to pay for conservation? I won't accept it. No."
Cassol's talk of fairness raises an interesting question in the global issue of climate change: What do countries (especially developed ones) owe to others (especially developing ones) when it comes to their individual climate change efforts? Providing an answer to this question is a primary objective of the upcoming Paris summit. And agreement won't be easy to come by, not least of all because of the mindset of representatives like Cassol. Is a country like the United States in a position to place demands on other countries regarding their environmental standards?

There are a couple ways of looking at the issue of fairness regarding large scale efforts like global climate action. A backward looking sense of fairness emphasizes that countries like the United States built their economic wealth with the power of fossil fuels and by laying bare large tracts of forest space. It would seem to follow that the fairness requires that currently developing countries to be afforded the same allowances in their attempts for economic prosperity. This is the sense of fairness that charges first-world advocates for strong environmental change with hypocrisy. And in the strict definition of the term -- advocating a policy for others that one either does not or has not followed themselves -- the charge hits its mark. But if advocating for environmental change is a form of hypocricy, it seems to be of [the virtuous sort](http://takimag.com/article/in_praise_of_hypocrisy/print#axzz3rHkZ51tR). Regardless of what happened in the past, global climate change is a serious issue for the present, and it requires significant social change.

The key point is that the call is for environmental _change_. The breezy approach to natural resource exploitation exhibited in the past by countries like the United States was a mistake. And it's one that we can't afford to allow to continue in the future. In this case, an appropriate response to the charge of hypocrisy is to invoke the simple proverb that two wrongs don't make a right. The climate issues facing the planet are immanent, and we can't let a backward looking sense of fairness prevent us from addressing those issues head on.

As an analogy, society seems to have come to an agreement that smoking tobacco is dangerous, and that we ought to strongly curtail the practice. Doing so drastically cuts down on the demand for tobacco crops, thereby undermining the current livelihood of many farmers. This is an unfortunate consequence, but it does not undermine the need to curtail the negative product. Society does not owe compensation to someone merely for eliminating their ability to make money off of an activity that is harmful.

But there is no denying that the Unites States is complicit the world's current climate predicament. There is a strong sense that we have a responsibility to make right the wrongs we have committed. But I want to suggest that this sense of responsibility does not come from a backward looking demand to pay for our actions. Instead, it comes from a forward looking recognition that we are in a position to help others avoid the wrongs that we did not. The United States is a wealthy country. We needn't focus on the source of that wealth to find reasons to help less well off countries in their climate change efforts. We need only acknowledge the fact that climate change is a shared issue and embrace the spirit of humanitarianism that pushes us to help others where we are able.

We shouldn't heed the tobacco farmer's claim that fairness requires us to ensure his right to grow whatever crop he wants. But we should recognize that the practice may be all he has ever known and that ending it will be very difficult. Fairness does demand that we do what we can to help him transition to an economically viable and socially sustainable alternative. Similarly, certain countries have a more significant burden when it comes to their individual climate change efforts. All nations have the duty to ensure the basic needs of their citizens, and having a reliable source of energy is a vital element of that task. For many developing countries, closing down coal power plants is not feasible under current conditions. And some countries, like Brazil, are in a unique position regarding the natural resources found within their borders. So, while Cassol is right to point out that Brazil's unique context poses an important concern for a global climate change agreement, he is wrong that fairness requires the rules to be applied uniformly to all countries. Each country must do its part, but what role makes sense for each nation depends on their specific needs and abilities.

With this idea in mind, the 194 nations of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change have established the [Green Climate Fund](http://www.greenclimate.fund/home), whose mission is to "mobilize unprecedented levels of funding to invest in low-emission and climate-resilient development on our home planet." This fund allows each country to contribute in whatever way it can to the global climate change effort. Cassol is also wrong to suggest that the United States has offered only a pittance toward this conservation effort. In fact, the United States has [pledged $3 billion to the GCF](https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/11/15/fact-sheet-united-states-support-global-efforts-combat-carbon-pollution-), more than any other pledging country. This pledge shows a recognition by the White house that our unique context allows us to use our relative prosperity to advance a global climate change initiative. Of course, we can't just throw money at the issue (and it should be noted that the US has not yet [signed an agreement with the GCF](http://www.greenclimate.fund/contributions/fine-print/#agreements)). The United States commitment also [involves such policies](http://www.sierraclub.org/interactive/international-climate-commitments#collapse4Three) as the Clean Power Plan and [eliminating our reliance on coal power plants](http://www.bigreuse.org/news/sending-coal-plants-out-pasture). Other countries have a responsibility to help the cause in a way that is fitting for their context.

The issue of fairness will be vitally important in coming to a global agreement on climate change. But fairness allows for differences in implementation of environmental policies. When it comes to issues as important as those like climate change, we can look to the past as a warning, but we ought to be focused on our shared future in determining our action. President Obama and the other United States delegates to the climate change summit should feel comfortable asserting the need for strong action on climate change.
